so I think karma can be really useful
because it helps us understand like how
the world works basically so it is my
belief that if you want to be better at
life you should understand how life
works that competence and ease it
activities comes through understanding
of those activities so if I understand
like you know how to control a character
in world of warcraft like if I use Waze
than a mouse and I understand what the
wk ducky does and what the a key does
and what the S key does and what the D
key does that my success in a particular
game will be improved right sort of a
no-brainer and so the question is is
that true of other things like is that
true of life like if you understand how
psychology works if you understand how
you know habit works
if you understand how biology works do
you get better at the game of life like
if you understand the nature of
procrastination and where
procrastination comes from will you do
better and I think the answer is yes and
so karma is one of the biggest things
like you know we can talk about habit
and psychology and procrastination but
those are all like one slice of what
life offers right so like this is gonna
be psychology and neuroscience and
things like that but life has like other
big chunks right so we can like do this
and I think that God MA is over here and
I think it's actually helps you
understand even more than the psychology
and neurology and stuff like that
because this kind of explains why things
happen and if we understand like why
things happen it becomes way easier to
understand life so we're gonna start
this in kind of a weird huh what's the
other half that's where you guys to
figure out so we're gonna start by sort
of let's start here okay so let's say
that here's human knowledge and I want
you guys to just think about this for a
second okay so like
let's say 5,000 years ago humans
understood this much and then we had
this so let's say like this is a cloud
with a thunderbolt right and then we
also had like biology or let's say it's
not called biology let's call it illness
okay so like there were some phenomenon
and human beings like understood this so
this is ours and when they looked at
like whether they said like oh that's
not us
like we don't understand how that works
that doesn't have principles to it this
is a guy named Zeus so Zeus controls
this and there's no reason if Zeus is
pissed off there's thunder and lightning
and if Zeus is happy there's no thunder
and lightning and like we're not really
sure how that works but like it's under
Zeus is control and then similarly like
illness is like not something to be
understood it's like the gods or other
forces that we can't control like muses
or randomness or entropy or or chaos
theory or whatever like this is not
something that fundamentally can be
understood so it's a question mark and
over time what's happened as science has
grown is we're like okay so let's do
this like so humans have sort of covered
this right we've moved the bar this way
and now we're here and we're like oh
thunder or lightning or not actually
there's like no God who controls it it's
like physical phenomenon that have
forces that we can understand and then
over time we also move over here and
then and then we have so now humans
control this stuff right we like we get
this but over here are places like why
or things like was I born to my parents
what are some other things why am i lazy
when others are not and we look at these
things and we say these are questions
that cannot be scientifically answered
right there's no like science so like
over here is the question works so we
say that oh this is like it's random
right so like a person whose religious
will say this is the province of God and
God works in mysterious ways and the
secularists or the atheists will say
there's like there's no order to the
universe that can be determined things
are just random but do you guys see how
like whether we attribute it to
randomness or god it's the same thing
there's no way for humans to understand
so now my first question to you is are
parts of the universe ordered and other
parts chaos right if we think about the
system of science the science say yeah
like this part of the universe has order
so like physics has ordered but biology
does not and like this part of the
universe has order but this part of the
universe is chaotic because if if we if
we kind of think about it
like essentially what's happened is the
chunks of universe that have become
ordered have grown over time as
understanding of science grows we've
gone from disorder to order right if we
look at this spectrum this spectrum over
here is like growing order over time
this is order over time right so like
does it make it so it I mean I'll share
with you one conclusion so like some
time ago I was very confused by like I
thought it was strange that there's like
sort of this arbitrary place that we
decide we we look at this thing and we
say oh yeah like everything on the
others
as chaos but this is order right so it's
kind of weird like that just doesn't
make sense to me
and so if we think about it you know so
it's my belief that things like it
doesn't make sense to me that the
universe has an arbitrary point at which
disorder starts like that just doesn't
make sense and generally speaking if you
look at it scientifically any place that
has been disordered that human beings
have looked into over time they start to
do deduce order and like Zeus is a great
example of that right like they looked
at thunder lightning and they were like
oh that's just there's no way to
understand that it's the whim of the
gods and then some guy was like I don't
accept that let me look into it and then
there were all kinds of other forces
that we attribute and this is why sort
of like you know the domain of God is
kind of shrinking over time
so now we get to if there is
fundamentally order in the universe and
you guys are allowed to disagree with
that right that's like I'm not a
philosopher or anything and so maybe I'm
wrong about that but generally speaking
I think that we can have we have good
evidence that human beings over time
have like made ground and expanding into
order or into disorder we've been like
colonizing disorder with order and I
think there's good scientific evidence
behind that so now you know it starts
with the hard sciences but like we're
even starting to deduce order out of
things that are unscientific so like
economics or sociology or disciplines
where there isn't like a clear science
or I mean there is but but it's kind of
like it's like a like it's not easily
observable and testable but we can still
find order principles within its
function right so these are the
quote-unquote soft sciences psychology
is another good example like we can't
you know do an x-ray or MRI of someone's
brain and know what they're thinking but
there's still ordered principles that
psychology adheres to so now we get to
Karma so what is garma okay
karma is nothing more than the principle
of cause and effect so some people say
that what goes around comes around but
that's incorrect actually garma is not
what goes around comes around it's that
every action has an equal and opposite
reaction it's Newton's second law all
really car by is is Newton's second law
it's just applied on a scale or a third
law is it third Locke they're like okay
thanks for correcting me guys
me llamo dr. K I mean sorry mae amo
espanol oh I was gonna write ii
again
okay so Newton's third law every action
has an equal and opposite reaction right
so so the interesting thing is that like
Newton said that this applies to physics
but gaddama says that this is a general
principle that applies to all things and
that like it's not just physical objects
that are subject to this karma priests
like sort of says that if you have if
actions have results then all actions
have results are all forces have
consequences and there's no way to
escape these and so what like so physics
you know this this is physics and then
like we can sort of see that actions
have results in terms of chemistry and
then like biochemistry right so if I
like mix like an alkane with like an
acid something is gonna happen I don't
remember right so and and then we end up
with biology and then we end up with
psychology and then we end up with
behavioral economics
and then we end up with advertising so
as we can see like these are sort of the
hard sciences right and then this is
where we get into the soft sciences but
even in advertising we know that if we
elicit a particular kind of cause like
if we place a particular object
somewhere on a shelf it is likely to
affect whether someone is willing to buy
it or not
probabilistically so this there's
there's cause and effect here there's
cause and effect here and then there's
cause and effect
garma so then we get to the areas where
science says oh this is random so like
you know why were you born a certain way
so in my opinion the biggest revolution
in karmic understanding so this is where
people like get hung up on karma okay so
people say that so this is fine we call
this science but stuff like this is BS
in is God in his religious and is
unscientific and so karma says things
like the what what is happening to you
in this life to a certain amount or
maybe all amounts but at least there's
at least 1% chance let's start here so
like people say like all of these things
are observable within this life but
there's no connection between things
before this life in this life this is
what science generally believes right
that like fine you have a particular
psychology and that determines your
actor advertising behavior but all of
that stuff is ensconced within this
particular life and then as soon as we
start doing things before this
particular life we start to get into
like hoity-toity stuff and like
religious stuff and chakras and crystal
healing and God and all that kind of
auditory things so we don't accept that
and Along Came genetics
so I think the biggest contribution from
modern science to support the theory of
karma is genetics and that may sound
like absolutely bizarre but I want you
guys to think about this for a second a
hundred and fifty years ago I want you
to go back in time a hundred fifty years
and pretend that you had the same
skeptical like atheistic views that you
have now like that that doesn't depend
on a particular body of knowledge right
it's like it's a view and pretend that I
came to you 150 years ago and I said
what you are in this life is actually
determined by your parents it's
determined by something that has nothing
to do with what your choices are in this
life that there is actually an order in
a predictive capability to understanding
how you turned out to be this way I can
predict your hair color is not
determined by anything in this life and
furthermore is not random but there is
actually a system of science that begins
prior to where you when you are even
born that is going to make a predictive
capacity and shape your life today and
people would have been like that's
insane
like there is no scientific link between
anything that happens before and today
and then along comes genetics and
genetics is like actually what you are
in this life is heavily determined by
things be up before this life that are
completely out of your a quote-unquote
control we'll get to that in a second so
this actually is is really fascinating
because genetics actually in my opinion
is one of the strongest supporters to
the theory of karma because generally
speaking when people sort of talk about
God Amaya and how it's unscientific they
draw they draw like a very important
line between things in this life and
things before this life
right so the theory of karma like if you
talk to Hindus and Buddhists they'll say
that things in this life are determined
by things before this life so this is
like they're saying okay this actually
leads to us and the first scientific
evidence that we have of this is
genetics and just think about that for a
second so this opens up a whole world of
possibility because if we have at least
one piece of scientific evidence that
supports that you can bridge this gap
then like what does that say because
then suddenly like this barrier becomes
artificial right this barrier is no
longer here and so what other kinds of
influences from this life are we opening
ourselves up to and this is basically
what karma says all karma says and it's
not really that complicated is that all
causes have effects and all effects have
causes that's really it it just says
that if you look at anything there is
there is a reason why this happened and
not like a cosmic moral reason just a
physical reason if I throw a pen up in
the air the pen is gonna come down and
so the problem that people have with
government this is why karma is
difficult to understand is because our
knowledge of this life is restricted to
this life okay so I want you guys to
imagine something so imagine that
there's a fence and there's a ball
there's one person on the side on this
side of the fence and there's a ball
that comes down and like lands over here
even though we can directly observe so
even though this is the only thing that
we can directly observe we can still
extrapolate where this ball came from
based on this and this is what karma
does when people talk about like
reincarnation and crap like that what
they're doing is they're saying even
though we can have only observe like
half of this interaction we can still
extrapolate like where things come from
and
anyway I don't I think that's just kind
of like I don't have a particular I
think that's worthy of further
discussion but we don't really need to
get into it I'm just sort of
highlighting what theory of got about
presupposes and so I think a good way to
think about this if you guys want to
understand karma is imagine that you
have amnesia amnesia every time you
sleep right so if like if you have
amnesia every time you sleep whenever
you wake up you only see the effects of
your actions in the past even though you
have no direct knowledge of them so if
you wake up in the morning and you see
like a dirty a sink full of dirty dishes
and you're like oh like that's
completely random like oh I just you
know unlucky me but no it's not unlucky
you it's because you didn't do the
dishes yesterday so I think if you want
to understand this whole business about
like prior lives and reincarnation and
crap like that like from an intellectual
or philosophical way you all you need to
do is the thought experiment is did I
say dirty dick all you have to do is is
kind of do this thought experiment where
you have amnesia every time you go to
sleep and like that's what people sort
of describe is like karma and and kind
of past lives and stuff like that so
what does this mean I mean I think all
this stuff is kind of interesting but
the question is like what does this mean
for us okay so so how does karma affect
our lives now like what can we you how
can we use this information the first is
that karma is a system of cultivation
not creation
[Music]
and so when you guys I want you guys to
think about it this way you want to
change your life right you can't change
your life all you can do is so cut them
up so what I mean by that is like if I
ask sometimes I'll ask people like how
do you grow a plant and they'll say like
you plant it and then you water it and
then you give it sunlight and then the
question is if you plant something like
let's say I put a seed down here and
this is dirt and then I add water right
and then I add sunlight does the plant
grow do we get a chute right does that
happen or does it not happen and the
answer is we don't really know yes
depends hopefully sometimes not always
right so let's just think about that for
a second so when you guys live your life
and you commit to an action in your mind
what do you think is gonna happen
because people say like so now let's
like think think about this for a second
so I made a mistake like I didn't do
well on this test and like the idea is
that you have a sense that you control
what happens when you do something right
you have this idea like this is why you
blame yourself because like if it's if I
didn't study enough then it's my fault
that I did bad on the test that the
action has a certain coral-like
leads not even correlation to a result
what what gaddama says is that you can
do all of the right things right like
you can you can provide sunlight and
water and fertilizer and that the plant
may not grow and why is this it's
because there are other forces which are
your prior Karma's which despite doing
all of the right things can actually
cause an action to not happen and what
this means is like it's not actually in
a sense that's sort of not your fault
because you know
I'm jumping around too much let me see
if I can explain this a little bit
better so this is what I see a lot of
people have problems with is that they
blame themselves for not getting a
particular result right so like if you
are a college dropout or a NEET you like
judge yourself and you're like I'm a
piece of because I didn't graduate
from college and I'm not like this and
I'm not like this and if you think about
that that blame it only works like you
can only blame yourself if you're
responsible like if you're not
responsible like if you don't control
this and this isn't true then you can't
completely you can't blame yourself for
this
this blame comes from a presupposition
that you control the result if you don't
control the result then you can't be to
blame right it's kind of like saying you
know I showed up at the rental car place
and I made a reservation and I have a
confirmation number but there was a
glitch in their system and their
computer systems are down so is that
your fault
like no obviously not so the more that
you believe that you control this part
or actually that's not right I wish I
could undo oh crap okay they're
beautiful the more that you believe you
control this part the more likely you
are to blame yourself because if you
don't control this then there's no like
it doesn't make any sense to blame and
if we think about what holds you back
when we were talking about like
avoidance procrastination and things
like that your self blame holds you back
right like that's true like you holding
yourself back because like oh I'm such a
this this and this you can't
forgive yourself you can't let go you
can't like cut yourself a break for
being the person that you are and
screwing things up so the question is is
there some way to make it easier to
forgive yourself and the answer is yes
if you look at karma and what karma says
is that this actually is not yours to
control like this is crazy man all you
control is this you can water a plant
you can give it sunlight and you can
give it fertilizer but that does not
equal growth this is what you guys
really have to understand and now I want
you guys to think about this like what
does this do for your life if you start
to think about yourself in this way
it's not even don't just don't be
emotionally invested in the outcome
understand that like you are only
capable of exerting a certain amount of
control right and this is the other
thing that I want you guys to understand
even when you feel like you don't do
your best you are doing your best right
this is the other really really crazy
thing about karma is that like karma
says that you know you so let's say you
blame yourself for like skipping a test
because you were afraid you were gonna
fail and then you use hold yourself
responsible for that but what you guys
aren't acknowledging is that that person
skips tests due to anxiety of failure
right so like you have an option to move
forward to take the test or skip it but
this person that you are this is the
problem with this way of thinking okay
is you guys think that time starts here
t0 is here right you guys think like oh
I should have done that but what you
guys need to understand is that this
person is the result of past Karma's so
time doesn't actually start here your
capability to man up and take that test
or woman up and take that test is not
actually like it's not like you have a
like you don't have like absolute
control in that moment you are sort of a
product of your prior circumstances and
if your prior circumstances have not
been good like never went to class
[Music]
got dumped by someone and mom and dad
got divorced okay so like if all the
is going on like you can't really
blame yourself for for like skipping a
test just think about that like it's not
like you you blame yourselves fully
right so there's absolute judgment here
you're an absolute but that's
actually not a fair way to look at
yourself because there's all kinds of
crap that got injected into you and and
some of this stuff is even things like
neglectful parents or genetics or even
that you were not given certain
advantages in life so I was given a
bunch of advantages so my parents for
example like financially supported me
when I was like 24 and in not making any
money or anything like that and so when
people look at my success so if I'm if
we put success over here and we make
this person dr. K they say like Oh dr. K
is so different he's so smart he's not
lazy what they don't get is that I have
this right and what what you guys don't
get is that like you know you guys maybe
had this or this or trauma in the past
or anxiety so now the interesting thing
is that like so what that means is that
I don't in the same way that I don't
blame myself for my failures I also
don't own my successes so I don't
believe that I'm successful because I'm
like hardworking and I lifted myself up
by my bootstraps you detach from all of
it because if I free myself from my
failures I also free myself from my
successes when I look back on my on my
life and I recognize like oh I had a
bunch of advantages like I was born
Indian like that was a huge advantage
why was it a huge advantage it's because
the body of knowledge that I chose to
learn from or that I was exposed
I had like a racial advantage like I had
a race bonus to learn yoga because I
grew up understanding words that were
spoken in my household that when I when
I let go to an ashram and they're like
Caucasian people there I realized like I
just have an advantage over them because
some of these concepts are baked into
the language that was spoken in my house
doesn't mean I'm smarter it just means
that like they're trying to understand
some concepts that like I grew up with
like they're learning yoga for the first
time at the age of 21 and when I went to
Sunday school at the age of 8 like
people taught me yoga it's absolutely
like a race bonus and so if I have a
race bonus that other people don't have
like how can i how can I say that I'm
better in like oh like I'm so successful
because like I'm so much better than you
like you guys suck and I'm amazing
because like I'm so smart no it's dumb
it's a race bone it's like I didn't do
anything to deserve that and so it
changes if if you don't deserve your
successes then you also don't deserve
your failures it's not really under your
control
so yeah right so like just think about
that for a second this leads to all this
stuff that we want like humility and
confidence and self forgiveness in
compassion and people like how do I do
that stuff I'm like oh you should learn
how to forgive yourself and they're like
how do I do that this is the way that
you do that you understand this so the
next thing is this also changes the way
that you act because here's the real
scam okay is that according to karma you
actually control all this this is a
really crazy thing okay and what I mean
by that and but we're gonna focus on
really one part of it is this this is
the operative thing right so now what I
want you guys to do is recognize that
going to class is not about getting a
grade going to class is about providing
a buff for future you it's not about
passing the test
it's not about graduating
from college it's not about getting a
good job it's just about buffing future
you and this is what karma is karma is
giving yourself the opportunity to
cultivate things for yourself you can
plant a dozen seeds but you can't make
them grow so what you guys should focus
on is planting seeds but the problem is
that when you plant a seed and that's
your focus and it doesn't grow then how
bummed out are you you're a little bit
bummed out but if you plant a seed and
then you try to like really really make
it grow you're like man I want that
plant to grow I really want the plant to
grow I want to graduate I want to get a
good job I want to get a girlfriend I
want to move out a house I won't do this
I don't do that I want this seven but
that's HAP na na ma you're not focused
on the sea you're focused on the fruit
right you're focused on the end game and
then what happens is if things don't go
your way then you get disappointed and
the disappointment keeps you from acting
and so instead what I want you guys to
focus on is like the action focus on
going to class and change your view from
I want to graduate to I want to set
myself up to graduate it's it's a tiny
little shift but it's revolutionary like
every day when you guys come to this
webinar and you do 10 or 15 minutes of
yoga that's a positive that's a positive
buff right these are the positive ones
yoga so I don't think you guys realize
by coming here and doing yoga you're
actually buffing future you and then
like things are gonna start to change in
your favor this is what I see time and
time and time again is that when people
start sowing positive karma they don't
really know what the result is gonna be
like there's no clear way when yoga's
over here every day what does that lead
to
job girlfriend-boyfriend
does that lead to that no not not not at
all like it's like how does yoga lead to
any of that but Yoga is one of these
influences it's one of the influences
that you don't see and that what I've
noticed time and time again and I've
done this work now with like literally
hundreds of people is that when they
start doing yoga every day like in
their life just starts to get better and
that cause and effect look so distant
that it's hard to like really see and so
what I want you guys to do is like
cultivate good things for yourself don't
do good things for yourself
cultivate good things for yourself right
cultivate a life for yourself or an
attitude for yourself by like doing good
things that don't have a reason like
don't have a good reason behind them I
know it sounds completely crazy because
right now you guys do things because of
particular reasons and if those reasons
don't pan out then you feel disappointed
and stuck and you feel like it's useless
to do stuff in that frame of mind leads
to you feeling like doing stuff is
useless just think about that for a
second
if action does not lead to result it
creates a negative feedback loop for
action right so this scenario results in
inaction
if action has no effect to result what
does this lead to this actually leads to
action
bizarre crazy this is karma
karma is saying sow the seed sow the
seed sow the seed we don't know if it's
gonna grow we don't know if it's gonna
grow we don't know it's gonna grow this
actually leads to action it's bizarre
because then what happens is like this
is what's crazy is the result starts to
come right at some point if you plant
enough seeds stuff is gonna start to
grow like that's gonna happen you guys
get that like if you go to the library
and you study every day like at some
point you're gonna start passing tests
but the key thing is to not go to the
library to pass tests it's crazy if you
try to pass a test by going to library
you're not going to go good if you don't
know what to think then you're doing it
right
see this is the problem is you guys get
stuck in this negative feedback loop
this is the problem right here anyway
okay so let's is to cheat code
absolutely that's what I'm telling you
guys karma is like a cheat code because
it gives you it's not a cheat code it's
a walkthrough right it doesn't allow you
to break the rules in a new way it's
like you know finding like a fountain in
a game that makes you like invulnerable
or buffs your stats it just makes the
game way easier to play okay so let's do
QA
[Music]
all right so ah very good annex so anak
says this almost feels like I'm not
responsible for anything your act
actually in a weird way you're
absolutely right
so the problem is that we view
responsibility with the result when we
think about I'm not responsible for
anything we lump these two together
right so we think about like if we think
about someone who's responsible the way
we describe a responsible person is by
results we say they have a job they
moved out of the house they have a
family they pay a mortgage they do this
they do that like they think about all
these kinds of things they think about
results but what you're actually
responsible for is your actions this is
where responsibility lies is with
actions not with the results and the
more you focus on being responsible for
your actions and letting go of your
results the better off you're gonna be
yeah my question is if a person is in
the habit of blaming themselves for
misfortunes in life doesn't karma give
them the opportunity to blame their
circumstances and if blame is not
healthy then how do you dissolve the
habit of blaming and not become a doer
okay great question so the first thing
is that like so if you aren't
responsible for the result can't you're
saying if you're not responsible for the
result can't you become a Doomer because
everything is sort of destined is that
what you mean Oh kind of like for
example if I have a habit of blaming
myself like I was I if I'm like
everything that's happened in my life is
my fault because I didn't do anything
about it up until this point then
doesn't understanding carmella doesn't
that make me able to blame that oh it
was all life's fault so therefore it's
not my fault
therefore it's fine if I don't do
anything about it so yes and no so this
is the thing to understand so like I
don't know if you're are you basically
saying that like you
it's life's fault therefore it's destiny
it's not me sort of yes okay so this is
what you guys have to understand so like
you know this debate
between freewill in destiny that exists
in the in the West
garma fixes this beautifully so there's
no debate in karma so what karma says is
that it is your choice whether you jump
off a cliff but once you jump off a
cliff you're destined to fall so karma
is a tie between freewill and destiny
and you're absolutely right that if you
look back on your life and you say
there's nothing else I could have done
in a bizarre way you're right but that
doesn't mean that there's nothing you
can't do today in fact what you should
do is reframe that to recognize there's
no you couldn't have done any better
than you did but today is a new day and
you can sow new karma so you don't
control anything that happened in the
past but in the present moment your
actions will influence the future I mean
that makes sense for me but from a point
of view of somebody who I was before it
seems like it's a hard concept to wrap
my mind around if I'm in the process of
if I'm just blaming myself and then I
get an out that I didn't blame
circumstance sure so your circumstances
so let's think about it this way right
these are circumstances that are out of
your control so not my fault so be it
I accept it you're correct not your
fault the question is what is the next
arrow that you put forward because at
this point it starts to become your
fault
what do you think about that ice yeah
that yeah I see the distinction now I
think it's a it's like a fine line but
like the idea is that doing everything
you can do is doing something now
absolutely under right so even if we
accept that the past is not your fault
because you couldn't control those
garments the these garments over here
was like you jumping off of like various
cliffs in past lives which you can't
control so if you want to let go of
blaming yourself there so be it tell
yourself it wasn't my fault there was
nothing I could have done but today is a
new day and you can definitely so new
seeds today so in a weird way I don't
want you to blame yourself
like if you're saying like how do I
don't i absolve myself with
responsibility go for it man unburden
yourself of responsibility learn to
forgive yourself for not achieving that
which you wanted to achieve and wake up
today and recognize that today is a new
day and I can sow new seeds and have new
results yeah it's bizarre but you're
absolutely correct you just seem easier
so see the the tricky think about what
you're saying is they say if this isn't
my fault then this isn't my fault this
is the false correlation right here
right this is where the nihilist or the
person who's like hedonistic or has no
meaning in life this is the correlation
that they make that the past and the
future are tied together but they're not
today is a different day in the actions
the Karma the seeds that you sow today
like it's like waking up one day and
looking out at your garden and saying I
have no fruit trees and it's like yeah
man like you can't wait you can't blame
yourself for not having fruit trees now
because you didn't plant anything in the
past but today you can plant and whether
you have fruit trees in your your yard a
year from now or not depends on whether
you plant today and you can even plant a
dozen trees today and maybe none of them
will grow there's a chance that a year
from now you'll still have no fruit
trees but when you fast forward to a
year from now and you look back on your
life and you're like okay there are no
fruit trees but you
know what I actually planted 1212 seeds
and I watered them every day and I gave
him sunlight and soil I did the best
that I could okay this is what I was
saying so when you look back at your
life a year let's let's say you fast
forward a year from now and then you
still don't have any fruit trees in your
garden something magical is gonna happen
even though you have no fruit trees in
your back garden you're gonna look back
on your life and you're gonna say you
know what it I did the best that I
could so I should rest easy and
sometimes life just throws you a
curveball and you can't do it the
question is did I do the best that I can
and should I be able to sleep at night
right this is a problem that physicians
face when their patients die
whether you sleep at night as a
physician depends not on whether your
patient died or not although sometimes
it takes time to learn this isn't
recognizing I did the best that I could
and sometimes bad happens and the
problem right now is that you guys have
not done the best that you could a year
ago you didn't do the best that you
could and that's what you blame yourself
for so it's not about being successful
or not being successful it's about
living a life without regrets living a
life in a way that you free yourself
from blame because you give it
everything you've got I mean it feels
amazing to give it everything you got
because a lot of times things work out
and sometimes things don't work out and
if you play a game and you play like
let's say I'm playing a game of dota or
something or Lal or valor --nt right and
if I like played the best that I
absolutely could and like I get crushed
like that's okay does that make sense
you doesn't make sense yeah
yeah and if I if I think about what you
know if I could wish one thing for you
guys it's not success what I think most
of the people who watch the stream are
looking for is to wake up one day and
say I gave it my all that's what they
want they don't want success they want
to wake up one day and be happy with the
person that they are and be happy with
the work that they put out into the
world they actually don't want a million
dollars like that is not what's missing
I have an analogy I just want to make
sure I got this correct
for example dota analogy you can try to
push the lane and kill creeps but you
don't guarantee weather
get the power absolutely is it is that
absolutely right like so you don't
respond you don't determine when you're
pushing a tower you don't determine
whether they five-man rotate to defend
it and gank you or whether no one shows
up you just have to do the right thing
yeah thank you okay next question
hey doctor stay with them just get a
mute stream hey man
okay hey so um my questions or just they
would like to give you a quick
background like I feel like I have a lot
of grief related to those past Karma's
sure because because I feel like I mean
in essence I feel like I've lost five
years of my life like although although
something good is like coming out of
those years where like in like you
mentioned in a stream earlier I feel
like I'm not building building my
foundation on a house of cards it's like
a stronger foundation coming from it
good but I I guess my question is like
how is karma different from setting up
good habits like like yeah is there a
difference between the two
like just focusing on building good
habits that might set you up for success
or like just a concept of karma like
what's the difference between them there
isn't right so like a good habit is the
fruit of a karma so if I wake up and I
do yoga every day the action that I do
is yoga on a daily basis or it's not
even a daily basis all I can do is yoga
today if I do yoga today and then when
talk tomorrow rolls around I can do yoga
or not do yoga
like when does it become a habit like
what does a habit how do I find a habit
like what is that show me a habit
rhetorical so how do I know whether
something is a habit I'm just using like
this habit bull F and I'm like it says
it takes 66 days to build a habit I know
but I'm asking what is a habit like I
feel like for example I want to make
yoga have it for me where it's like I do
it every day I'm not asking you what you
want your habit to be I'm asking you
what is a habit okay it's something I do
every day regardless of what it brings
me okay so does that sound like Karma to
you okay so I mean maybe not that
everyday concept like very good
excellent
so this is the main thing that you need
to understand a habit is not something
you can have going forward it's
something that you look back on okay I'm
not sure it follow so like a guard my
Garmin is about action in the present
right and habit is is is like it's kind
of I mean there are some things that are
habit but let me put it this way like
you said you notice that you you paused
at the word every day it's something
that you do every day that you you know
that is relatively easy for you or
whatever but the king the key difference
between habit and Karma is habit is like
you don't you can't have a habit going
forward you can have a habit when you
look back so when you look back and you
take actions on a daily basis without
the exertion of willpower that is what
we call a habit it's an automatic
behavior oh yeah yeah right how's the
difference from karma it's different
because karma is about the present and a
habit is about the past you can't have a
habit going forward because you have no
idea what you're gonna do tomorrow it
feels like your Karma maybe covers your
mindset as well whereas habit is like
just the action so yeah well I think
that garma has a lot to do with mindset
and so let me let me put it so your
question was is habit different from
Karma so I think some people got what I
was saying about a habit is in the past
but so I'll put it this way so if you so
if you take the right actions on a daily
basis one of the fruits that garma can
bear is something called a habit and a
habit is the capacity to engage in a
behavior with a relatively low
investment of willpower or even like an
automaticity to it like a habit is like
an automatic behavior right it becomes
easy once it becomes a habit and I think
habits are built through karmic actions
okay so Karan was like laying the seeds
for the habit to grow yes
and then the habit is also up Gautama
for future you so this is what karma
says right is that there are causes and
effects and effects or causes
it's a loop it's not linear so if I
throw a ball up in the air and then the
ball lands on the ground the next time I
walk into the room the ball is gonna be
on the ground right and then then I can
pick the ball up so all things are tied
like causes lead to effects and in
effects in turn or future causes does
that make sense or no um I'd like to be
honest I'm not getting it good no but I
I might I might listen to this yeah let
me let me explain it so it's let's let's
spend time on this okay so let me think
let me show you something okay so let's
say that I study every day at the
library what's what's the result of
studying every day at the library I'm
like a good study habits so like if a
test comes you you don't have to like
take radical change - great therefore it
you're oh you already know good study
habit so let me ask you something so we
can sort of say that a good study habit
is the result of the Karma of studying
every day right fair yeah okay so now my
question to you and what's your name
buddy Simon Simon is that does a good
study habit is that a cause for future
effects or is that the end of the rope
for me personally that feels like a like
something for future results absolutely
right so then you you graduate from
college let's say okay so now we can see
that the good study habit is both an
effect and a cause do you see that yeah
right so like what's the relationship
between karma and habit a habit is just
one result that is also like a future
cause but at the end of the day like so
this is this is exactly the point is
that if you think about
current you and what kind of action you
take if you've got two choices right to
take act in a good way or at that
current you is the result of prior
Karma's and so like good study habits go
here let's say gaming goes here right
because you stayed up too late and then
like let's say this is do you go to
class and then this is yes and this is
no so do you see that like in this
scenario your prior actions create the
you that exists now in shapes your
likelihood to take actions in the future
do you get that yeah yeah I know okay
so like where do habits come in because
habits are created by prior Karma's does
that make sense like whether you go to
the library every day or not determines
whether you have good study habits yeah
yeah like what path karma has an effect
on you or have this today absolutely so
then did you so what's your question or
if I answered that like I got the sense
that your question is what's the
relationship between karma and study
habits and and this is sort of the
answer that I have for you is that karma
shapes your study habits but then your
study habits are in and of themselves a
karmic effect for future you so they're
they're intertwined absolutely oh okay
yeah yeah again so that yeah so my
habits will become my Karma for my
future self exactly okay and so the way
that I want you guys to live your life
is to build Karma's for your future self
don't become a don't develop good study
habits so that you can graduate just set
up like try to help out like if you ever
played a game like you know wow where
you you create
an alt and you send money from your like
prior character to your like alt you
know what I'm talking about that yes
sweetie
I'm trying to teach people on the
internet about Karma
I don't know why that's a good question
it's okay she can say just almost done
Meili okay hold on it's okay you can say
okay so so I'm gonna give you guys one
last gaming analogy and then I gotta run
okay so in World of Warcraft you can
have a high level character who makes
money really really fast and then you
can create a new low level character and
then the money like the low level
character earns money in a far slower
rate than the high level character and
so what I want you guys to think about
in karma is like when you have a high
level character you can send stuff from
your high level character to your low
level character and it really
accelerates your growth and so what I
want you guys to understand about karma
is like sowing good Karma's is like
sending stuff to your future self so
you're like setting up your all for
success or failure or an ease of success
or failure down the road you guys got it
I don't know if that makes sense if you
don't play wow it can be hard to
understand but ok good thanks for asking
Simon I got a run guys but thanks thanks
for asking you a question man thank you
thank you ok so
compound interest is absolutely right so
one person says compound interest so I
want you guys to understand this very
clearly okay the difference between and
I mean I say I keep on making
comparisons so maybe that's not good but
the difference between me and you is not
that I'm smarter the difference between
me and you is compound interest right so
like I'm older than most of our audience
not all of our audience so the
difference is I started investing things
at the age of 21 and I didn't even see a
result until like 2010 so I went to
India at the age of 21 and it took nine
years for that to bear fruit 2010 is
when I started medical school okay and
then that in turn has led to the bearing
of all kinds of other fruit / hey and so
so give yourselves time and don't worry
about moving out of the house and on
other things like that just focus on
building that compound interest set your
future you up for good things through
karma and if those things happen great
if they don't happen don't worry about
it just continue investing continue
planting seeds continue planting seeds
hype and then eventually stuff will
start to grow okay so if you're thirty
fine so be it I started med school at
the age of twenty seven or something
it's okay it's not the end of the world
alright let's go ahead and who do we
want to raid oh we want to raid you
you're okay it looks like we're raiding
my two-year-old